Python Functions

A function is a reusable block of code that performs a specific task. Instead of writing the same code in multiple places, you define it once as a function and call it whenever you need it.

Why Use Functions

Functions make programs easier to read, easier to maintain, and easier to test. If you need to change how a task is done, you only change it in one place inside the function, rather than finding every place in your code where you wrote the same logic.

Defining a Function

You define a function using the def keyword, followed by the function name, parentheses, and a colon. The code inside the function must be indented.

    def greet():
        print("Hello, learner!")

This defines a function called greet. The function does not run yet. It is just being defined.

Calling a Function

To run a function, you call it by writing its name followed by parentheses.

    greet()

This will output:
    Hello, learner!

You can call the same function as many times as you like.

    greet()
    greet()
    greet()

Parameters

A parameter is a variable that you pass into a function when you call it. Parameters let you write flexible functions that work with different values.

    def greet(name):
        print("Hello " + name)

    greet("Alice")
    greet("Bob")

This will output:
    Hello Alice
    Hello Bob

The variable name receives the value you pass in when you call the function.

Multiple Parameters

A function can accept more than one parameter. Separate them with commas.

    def add(a, b):
        print(a + b)

    add(3, 4)

This will output:
    7

Return Values

A function can send a result back to the code that called it using the return statement.

    def add(a, b):
        return a + b

    result = add(3, 4)
    print(result)

This will output:
    7

The difference between using print() and return inside a function is important. print() displays output on the screen. return sends the value back so it can be stored or used in further calculations.

    def square(n):
        return n * n

    value = square(5)
    bigger = value + 10
    print(bigger)

This will output:
    35

If a function does not have a return statement, it automatically returns None.

Default Parameter Values

You can give a parameter a default value. If the caller does not provide a value for that parameter, the default is used.

    def greet(name="learner"):
        print("Hello " + name)

    greet("Alice")
    greet()

This will output:
    Hello Alice
    Hello learner

Code Reuse Example

Without functions, if you wanted to calculate the area of three rectangles, you would repeat the same calculation three times. With a function, you write the logic once.

    def rectangle_area(width, height):
        return width * height

    print(rectangle_area(4, 5))
    print(rectangle_area(3, 7))
    print(rectangle_area(6, 2))

This will output:
    20
    21
    12

Common Mistakes

Forgetting the colon after the def line will cause a SyntaxError.

Forgetting to call the function means the code inside it never runs.

Confusing print() with return is a common mistake. Use return when you want to use the result of a function in another calculation.
