Python Loops

Loops allow a program to repeat a block of code multiple times. Instead of writing the same instruction over and over, you write it once inside a loop and tell Python how many times to repeat it.

The for Loop

A for loop repeats a block of code for each item in a sequence. The most common sequence for beginners is range().

    for i in range(3):
        print(i)

This will output:
    0
    1
    2

The variable i takes each value from the sequence in turn. range(3) produces the values 0, 1, and 2. Notice that it starts at 0 and stops before 3.

Iterating Over a List

You can also use a for loop to go through each item in a list.

    fruits = ["apple", "banana", "cherry"]
    for fruit in fruits:
        print(fruit)

This will output:
    apple
    banana
    cherry

The variable fruit takes each value from the list in turn.

The while Loop

A while loop repeats a block of code as long as a condition is True. When the condition becomes False, the loop stops.

    count = 0
    while count < 3:
        print(count)
        count = count + 1

This will output:
    0
    1
    2

It is important to update the variable inside the loop. If count never changes, the condition count < 3 will always be True and the loop will run forever. This is called an infinite loop.

Choosing Between for and while

Use a for loop when you know in advance how many times you want to repeat something, or when you are going through a list or sequence.

Use a while loop when you want to keep repeating something until a condition changes, and you do not know in advance how many repetitions will be needed.

The range() Function

range() generates a sequence of numbers. It has three forms:

    range(stop)              starts at 0, stops before stop
    range(start, stop)       starts at start, stops before stop
    range(start, stop, step) counts from start to stop in steps

Examples:
    range(5)         gives 0, 1, 2, 3, 4
    range(2, 6)      gives 2, 3, 4, 5
    range(0, 10, 2)  gives 0, 2, 4, 6, 8

The Accumulator Pattern

A common use of loops is to build up a total. This is called the accumulator pattern.

    numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
    total = 0
    for number in numbers:
        total = total + number
    print(total)

This will output:
    15

The variable total starts at 0. Each time through the loop, the current number is added to total. After the loop ends, total holds the sum of all the numbers.

A common mistake is to write total = number instead of total = total + number. This replaces total with the current number each time instead of adding to it, so you end up with just the last number in the list.

Counting with a Loop

You can use a loop to count how many items meet a condition.

    scores = [45, 78, 92, 55, 88]
    passing = 0
    for score in scores:
        if score >= 60:
            passing = passing + 1
    print(passing)

This will output:
    3
